---
key:    WBZ25
kind:   inproceedings
author: "Kunshan Wang, Stephen M. Blackburn, Peter Zhu and Matthew Valentine-House"
title:  "Reworking Memory Management in CRuby: A Practitioner Report"
in:     "Proceedings of the 2025 ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Memory Management (ISMM'25)"
year:   2025
pdf:    "ruby-ismm-2025.pdf"
doi:    "10.1145/3735950.3735960"
link:   https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3735950.3735960
---

Ruby is a dynamic programming language that was first released in 1995 and
remains heavily used today. Ruby underpins Ruby on Rails, one of the most widely
deployed web application frameworks. The scale at which Rails is deployed has
placed increasing pressure on the underlying CRuby implementation, and in
particular its approach to memory management. CRuby implements a mark-sweep
garbage collector which until recently was non-moving and only allocated
fixed-size 40-byte objects, falling back to malloc to manage all larger objects.

This paper reports on a multi-year academic-industrial collaboration to rework
CRuby's approach to memory management with the goal of introducing modularity
and the ability to incorporate modern high performance garbage collection
algorithms. This required identifying and addressing deeply ingrained
assumptions across many aspects of the CRuby runtime. We describe the
longstanding CRuby implementation and enumerate core challenges we faced and
lessons they offer.

Our work has been embraced by the Ruby community, and the refactorings and new
garbage collection interface we describe have been upstreamed.

We look forward to this work being used to deploy a new class of garbage
collectors for Ruby. We hope that this paper will provide important lessons and
insights for Ruby developers, garbage collection researchers and language
designers.

{% comment %}
vim: tw=80 spell
{% endcomment %}
